Node.js, Express, and MongoDB Interview Questions for a 2-Year Experienced Engineer

Node.js Core Concepts

Event Loop: Explain the event loop mechanism and how it handles asynchronous operations.
Non-blocking I/O: How does Node.js achieve non-blocking I/O?
Callback Hell: What is callback hell and how can it be avoided?
Promises: How do promises work in Node.js?
Async/Await: Explain the use of async/await for handling asynchronous operations.
Streams: Describe the concept of streams in Node.js and their use cases.
Buffer: Explain the Buffer class and its use for binary data.
Express.js

Routing: Explain how routing works in Express.js.
Middleware: What is middleware and how is it used in Express.js?
Request and Response Objects: Describe the properties and methods of the Request and Response objects.
Error Handling: How do you handle errors in Express.js?
Templating Engines: Explain the use of templating engines like EJS, Pug, or Handlebars.
Session Management: How do you manage sessions in Express.js?
Authentication and Authorization: Explain strategies for implementing authentication and authorization.
MongoDB

Basic Operations: Explain CRUD operations (Create, Read, Update, Delete) in MongoDB.
Data Modeling: Discuss the concept of embedded documents and arrays.
Querying: Explain the use of find, findOne, and aggregate pipelines.
Indexing: What are indexes and how do they improve query performance?
Aggregation Framework: Describe the stages of an aggregation pipeline.
Sharding and Replication: Explain the concepts of sharding and replication.
Security: Discuss security best practices for MongoDB applications.
Node.js and Express.js with MongoDB

Connecting to MongoDB: How do you connect to a MongoDB database using the Node.js driver or Mongoose?
Performing CRUD Operations: Demonstrate how to perform CRUD operations using Mongoose or the Node.js driver.
Handling Asynchronous Operations: Explain how to handle asynchronous operations with MongoDB using promises or async/await.
Error Handling: How do you handle errors in MongoDB operations?
Data Validation: How do you validate data before saving it to MongoDB?
Caching: Explain strategies for caching data from MongoDB.
Performance Optimization: Discuss techniques for optimizing MongoDB queries and Node.js applications.
Additional Tips

Practice Coding Challenges: Solve coding challenges on platforms like LeetCode, HackerRank, and Codewars.
Review Core Concepts: Revise fundamental concepts of JavaScript, Node.js, Express.js, and MongoDB.
Understand Asynchronous Programming: Grasp the intricacies of asynchronous programming in Node.js.
Learn Testing: Familiarize yourself with testing frameworks like Jest or Mocha to write unit and integration tests.
Stay Updated: Keep up with the latest trends and best practices in the Node.js ecosystem.
Prepare for System Design Questions: Be ready to discuss system design principles and trade-offs.
Practice Behavioral Questions: Anticipate questions about your experience, problem-solving skills, and teamwork abilities.
By focusing on these areas, you can effectively prepare for your Node.js, Express.js, and MongoDB interview.


1. What is the event loop in Node.js?
The event loop is a single-threaded mechanism that continuously checks a queue of events and executes them. It allows Node.js to ha...




Node.js Core Concepts

1. Explain the event loop mechanism and how it handles asynchronous operations.
The event loop is a single-threaded mechanism that continuously checks for new events, processes them, and then returns control to the event queue. Asynchronous operations are handled by delegating them to the operating system and registering callbacks to be executed when the operation completes. The event loop then picks up these callbacks and executes them.

2. How does Node.js achieve non-blocking I/O?
Node.js uses an event-driven, non-blocking I/O model. When a request is made, it's passed to the operating system. Instead of waiting for the operation to complete, Node.js registers a callback function. Once the operation finishes, the operating system notifies the event loop, which then triggers the callback.

3. What is callback hell and how can it be avoided?
Callback hell occurs when nested callbacks create a pyramid-like structure, making code hard to read and maintain. To avoid it:

Use Promises: They provide a cleaner way to handle asynchronous operations.
Use Async/Await: A syntactic sugar over Promises, making asynchronous code look more synchronous.
4. How do promises work in Node.js?
A Promise represents the eventual completion (or failure) of an asynchronous operation and its resulting value. It has three states: pending, fulfilled, or rejected.   

5. Explain the use of async/await for handling asynchronous operations.
Async/await makes asynchronous code look more synchronous. The async keyword declares a function as asynchronous, and the await keyword pauses the execution of the function until the Promise is resolved or rejected.

6. Describe the concept of streams in Node.js and their use cases.
Streams are a way of handling data as it flows, rather than all at once. They are used for:

Reading and writing files
Networking
Processing large datasets
7. Explain the Buffer class and its use for binary data.
The Buffer class is used to handle binary data in Node.js. It provides methods for manipulating binary data, such as copying, slicing, and comparing.

Express.js

1. Explain how routing works in Express.js.
Routing in Express.js involves defining routes using the app.METHOD(path, callback) syntax. The HTTP method (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, etc.) and the path determine which callback function to execute.

2. What is middleware and how is it used in Express.js?
Middleware functions are functions that have access to the request and response objects, as well as the next middleware function in the chain. They can be used for:   

Logging
Authentication
Parsing request bodies
Error handling
3. Describe the properties and methods of the Request and Response objects.

Request object: Contains information about the incoming request, such as headers, query parameters, and body.
Response object: Used to send responses to the client, including setting headers, status codes, and the response body.
4. How do you handle errors in Express.js?
Errors can be handled using error-handling middleware. These middleware functions have four arguments: err, req, res, and next.

5. Explain the use of templating engines like EJS, Pug, or Handlebars.
Templating engines allow you to dynamically generate HTML content. They use placeholders and expressions to insert data into the template.

6. How do you manage sessions in Express.js?
Sessions are used to store user-specific data across multiple requests. Express.js provides built-in session middleware to manage sessions.

7. Explain strategies for implementing authentication and authorization.
Authentication involves verifying the identity of a user, while authorization determines what a user is allowed to do. Strategies include:

Session-based authentication
Token-based authentication
OAuth and OpenID Connect
MongoDB

1. Explain CRUD operations (Create, Read, Update, Delete) in MongoDB.

Create: db.collection.insertOne(document)
Read: db.collection.findOne({ query })
Update: db.collection.updateOne({ query }, { update })
Delete: db.collection.deleteOne({ query })
2. Discuss the concept of embedded documents and arrays.

Embedded documents: Documents nested within other documents.
Arrays: A list of values, which can be primitive values or documents.
3. Explain the use of find, findOne, and aggregate pipelines.

find: Returns an array of documents matching a query.
findOne: Returns the first document matching a query.
Aggregate pipeline: A sequence of stages to process data and produce results.
4. What are indexes and how do they improve query performance?
Indexes are data structures that MongoDB uses to speed up searches. They can be created on specific fields to improve query performance.

5. Describe the stages of an aggregation pipeline.
The stages in an aggregation pipeline include:

$match: Filters documents.
$project: Selects and transforms fields.
$group: Groups documents by specified fields.
$sort: Sorts documents.
$limit: Limits the number of documents.
$skip: Skips a certain number of documents.
6. Explain the concepts of sharding and replication.

Sharding: Distributes data across multiple servers to improve scalability.
Replication: Creates multiple copies of a dataset to improve data durability and availability.
7. Discuss security best practices for MongoDB applications.

Use strong passwords and authentication mechanisms.
Restrict access to the database.
Keep MongoDB updated with the latest security patches.
Use appropriate authorization controls.
Node.js and Express.js with MongoDB

1. How do you connect to a MongoDB database using the Node.js driver or Mongoose?
Use the MongoClient class to connect to MongoDB directly or use Mongoose to simplify the process.

2. Performing CRUD Operations:
Use the methods provided by the MongoDB driver or Mongoose to perform CRUD operations.

3. Handling Asynchronous Operations:
Use Promises or async/await to handle asynchronous operations with MongoDB.

4. Error Handling:
Use try-catch blocks to handle errors in MongoDB operations.

5. Data Validation:
Use Mongoose's schema validation or custom validation logic to validate data before saving it to MongoDB.

6. Caching:
Use techniques like caching middleware or client-side caching to improve performance.

7. Performance Optimization:
Optimize queries, use indexes, and consider sharding for large datasets.

